# Internet Challenge
**10%** of all Americans (34 million people) lack access to quality Internet connectivity. <a href = "" >The Smart Community Networks Challenge</a> aims to close this access gap by enhancing wireless connectivity in areas where Internet access is a challenge, whether due to geographic, financial or other factors. With a total of **$1M** in prize money, the Smart Community Networks Challenge seeks wireless solutions that leverage existing physical infrastructure to provide robust access to the whole Internet in underserved areas. 

## Our Problem Statement
The primary issue facing communities in need of greater access to the internet is infrastructure. The backbone of the internet is essentially composed of cables due their reliability and speed. Satellite and other wireless methods are alternative options yet these methods are undercut by geographical, meteorological, and other constraints. Provided little commercial interest and small government funding bottlenecks access to these communities or require them to set up their own infrastructure. 

## Our Solution Statement 
Our solution consists of 3 parts: **`Named Data Networking (NDN)`**, **`modified routers`**, and a **`networking logistics`** tool. NDN, a development in network protocols, is key to our project. Providing more security and faster browsing speeds over the existing TCP/IP protocol, it will achieve quick and reliable online access. The hardware leverages a low cost router to run NDN and establish a mesh-network. Our networking logistics assists communities with assessing, planning, and setting up internet access.

## Users
Like access to electricity and indoor plumbing, broadband Internet should be seen as a utility necessity. However, 34 million Americans lack access to quality Internet (of which **23 million** do not have access to broadband) due to various reasons.

<font color = "green">Our off-grid Internet design fulfills this gap by tailoring it to those with low quality or no access.</font> It’s likely that this group has at least one of the following characteristics: 1) low socioeconomic status, 2) reside in difficult, isolated, or hazardous geographic zones, 3) have between 1–2 Internet service providers (ISPs), or 4) low education level. Income may be the most transparent factor as it correlates to the geographic variations of the amount of ISPs and education level. Currently, 80 – 90% of the most affluent households in the United States have Internet at home, in contrast to 50% of the those with the lowest median income. With that, our team will target rural communities as poverty and disability rates are higher than urban areas. Additionally they have less physical and financial access to resources, which translates to very few ISPs; thus, a lack of competition leads to overpriced and poor quality of services. 1 in 3 have only 1 ISP and majority of the rest have only 2.
